The English Institute of Sport is a multi-sport facility in Sheffield, South Yorkshire, England. The facility designed by FaulknerBrowns Architects was opened in December 2003 at a cost of £24 million. Its main feature is a 200m indoor track, but it also hosts several other sporting arenas as well as a large gym and extensive sports medicine facilities. It is in the Lower Don Valley between the Sheffield Arena and Don Valley Bowl. It is managed by SIV (Sheffield International Venues).

Facilities
The facility is the training venue of choice for a number of sports including athletics, basketball, boxing, fencing, futsal, judo, netball, table tennis and volleyball.
There are many clubs which meet at the venue including City of Sheffield Athletic Club, Sheffield Sharks, Sheffield Futsal Club, Sheffield Sword Club, Concorde Netball Club, England Netball, and England Volleyball, as well as hosting snooker's main professional academy. The centre also often hosts sports days for local secondary schools.

History
The venue hosted the European Indoor Trials & UK Championships (athletics) between 14 – 15 February 2009. They also hosted the European Fencing championships in July 2011.Since 2008, the venue has hosted qualifying matches for the World Snooker Championship, with the main stages held in the nearby Crucible Theatre. Qualifying matches, previously held in Prestatyn, typically took place between late February and early March but are now held in April.  Since 2010 the EIS also hosted qualifying matches to snooker tournaments as well as all the now defunctPTC events.
The EIS-Sheffield was used by British Athletes to train for the 2012 Summer Olympics. In February 2015, it was announced that the English Institute of Sport, Sheffield would be incorporated into the Olympic Legacy Park on the site of the old Don Valley Stadium.

See also
English Institute of Sport

References
External links
Official Site
City of Sheffield AC website
England Basketball website
Amateur Boxing Association of England website
Sheffield Sword Club website
England Netball website