Sheffield Park Garden is an informal landscape garden five miles east of Haywards Heath, in East Sussex, England.  It was originally laid out in the 18th century by Capability Brown, and further developed as a woodland garden in the early 20th century by its then owner, Arthur Gilstrap Soames. It is now owned by the National Trust.

History
The gardens originally formed part of the estate of the adjacent Sheffield Park House, a gothic country house, which is still in private ownership today.

Sheffield Park as an estate is mentioned in the Domesday Book of 1086. In August 1538, Thomas Howard, 3rd Duke of Norfolk, entertained King Henry VIII here.  By 1700, the Deer Park had been partially formalised by Lord De La Warr, who planted avenues of trees radiating from the house and cleared areas to establish lawns.
In 1769, the estate was sold to aspiring politician John Holroyd. He was created Baron Sheffield in 1781 whereafter it was called "Sheffield Park", and was elected as a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1783. John lived there with his wife Maria and spent a fortune on his house and estate. James Wyatt remodelled the house in the fashionable Gothic style and Capability Brown was commissioned to landscape the garden. Humphry Repton followed Brown in 1789–1790. The original four lakes form the centrepiece of the garden. It is particularly noted for its plantings of trees selected for autumn colour, including many Black Tupelos.

In 1876 the third Earl of Sheffield laid out a cricket pitch. It was used on 12 May 1884 for a cricket match between Lord Sheffield's XI and Australia. The Australian team won by an innings and 6 runs.By 1885, an arboretum was being established, consisting of both exotic and native trees.
Arthur Gilstrap Soames purchased the estate in 1909 and continued large-scale planting.  Upon his death in 1934, the mansion and estate were inherited by his nephew, Arthur Granville Soames. During World War II, the house and garden became the headquarters for a Canadian armoured division, and Nissen huts were sited in the garden and woods. The estate was split up and sold in lots in 1953.The National Trust purchased approximately 40 hectares in 1954, now up to 80 ha with subsequent additions. It is home to the National Collection of Ghent azaleas.
The estate was used for exterior shooting in the 1961 film, The Innocents, where it served as the Gothic Bly Manor, the setting of the Henry James novella, The Turn of the Screw.

See also
Sheffield Park is a railway station on the heritage Bluebell Railway.
Sheffield Park, Uckfield, the cricket ground.

References
External links
Sheffield Park Garden information at the National Trust