Sheffield Steel Roller Derby (SSRD) is a women's flat track roller derby league based in Sheffield, South Yorkshire, England. Founded in August 2008, the league has over 70 members comprising two competitive teams, the All Stars (A team) and the Crucibelles (B team). A number of skaters also train as non-competitive, recreational group called the Molten Mavens. SSRD are a member of both the United Kingdom Roller Derby Association (UKRDA) and the Women's Flat Track Derby Association (WFTDA).

History and organization
Pauline "Jane Doe-a-Go-Go" Chalmers established the league as "Sheffield Steel Rollergirls" in August 2008 in a desire to make new friends, after having recently moved to the city and discovering roller derby on MySpace. Finding that there was no roller derby team in Sheffield, she created a MySpace profile dedicated to the creation of a local team. While many presume that members of the team are students, they in fact also include teachers, engineers and other professionals, ranging in age from late teens to mid-forties and beyond.In March 2010, the team received a £700 grant from the Sheffield Telegraph as part of the South Yorkshire Community Foundation's Grassroots Grants programme designed to fund "worthwhile projects" in Sheffield. This allowed the league to organise their first home bout at Ponds Forge International Sports Centre in July 2010.
On September 3, 2011 the league B team, the Crucibelles, debuted against the Whippin' Hinnies, the Newcastle Roller Girls B team, in a double header that also saw the All Stars play Newcastle's A Team, the Canny Belters.
Sheffield Steel Rollergirls entered the Women's Flat Track Derby Association Apprentice Programme in July 2012, and became full members of the WFTDA in June 2013.In January 2019, the league changed its name to Sheffield Steel Roller Derby as a move to reflect the inclusive nature of the league and the sport as a whole.
Sheffield Steel Roller Derby practice three times a week  with extra sessions outdoors during the summer. The league is a skater-run organisation, is managed by a committee of elected officers who head up sub-committees in areas such as training, media, merchandise, sponsorship and events. Officers are re-elected annually, as are the league Captain and Vice Captain.

WFTDA rankings
NR = no ranking assigned in this release

Early games
¹ Results from Sheffield Steel Rollergirls' view

In the media
Sheffield Steel Rollergirls have been featured in the Sheffield Telegraph, and the Sheffield Star. The SmashDance event was also mentioned in Exposed Magazine.
Sheffield Steel Rollergirls appeared on ITV1's ITV Calendar on 22 April 2010. They have also had a number of appearances on BBC Radio Sheffield.On 10 November 2010, the team featured on BBC Online. On 4 December 2010, the team featured on BBC2  Sportsround  (repeated on CBBC on 5 December 2010) as part of an "Alternative Sports Special".

In the community
On 9 April 2010, Sheffield Steel Rollergirls took part in the Showroom Cinema's premiere of Whip It. Ten members of the league completed the Goodwood Roller Marathon in August 2010, raising over £1,200 for the Sheffield Children's Hospital.  A group of skaters from the team completed the 2011 Goodwood Marathon for the NSPCC and the Bluebell Wood Children's Hospice in Sheffield. More recent charity events have concentrated on raising awareness and donations for The Homeless Period.
Sheffield Steel Rollergirls were previously sponsored by local Sheffield company alpharooms.com

SSRD and national teams
A number of SSRD skaters and coaches have been involved in competition for a range of national teams:

Holly Hotrod (17) was part of the Team England training squad for the 2014 Roller Derby World Cup
Glenys the Menace (44) was part of the Wales Roller Derby squad for the 2014 Roller Derby World Cup
She RARR (242) was part of the West Indies Roller Derby squad for the 2014 Roller Derby World Cup, and part of the management team for the 2018 Roller Derby World Cup
Madge Juicer (5) was part of the West Indies Roller Derby squad for the 2018 Roller Derby World Cup
Athas' Sin (11) was part of the Romania Roller Derby squad for the 2018 Roller Derby World Cup
Tom Pritchard was bench coach for the West Indies Roller Derby squad at the 2014 and 2018 Roller Derby World Cups

References
External links
Sheffield Steel Rollergirls Bout Photos
A Team results on Flat Track Stats
Crucibelles results on Flat Track Stats