Sheffield Winter Garden in the city of Sheffield in South Yorkshire is one of the largest temperate glasshouses to be built in the UK during the last hundred years, and the largest urban glasshouse anywhere in Europe. It is home to more than 2,000 plants from all around the world. It was officially opened by Queen Elizabeth II on 22 May 2003.
Part of the £120 million Heart of the City regeneration project that has created the Peace Gardens and the £15 million Millennium Galleries, the Winter Garden was designed by Pringle Richards Sharratt Architects and Buro Happold and is some 70 metres (77 yd) long and 21 metres (23 yd) high.
The building has background frost protection to a minimum of 4 degrees Celsius and it is one of the largest Glued Laminated Timber or "Glulam" buildings in the UK (Glulam is made by forming and gluing strips of timber into specific shapes). The wood used is Larch, a durable timber which will, over time, turn a light silvery grey colour. The larch, derived from sustainable forests, requires no preservatives or coatings. This reduces the use of solvents and also avoids the use of chemicals that could harm the plants. It has an intelligent Building Management System which controls fans and vents to make sure the plants are cooled in summer and kept warm in winter. The system will "learn" year by year.
The bedding plants are changed five times a year, to give a seasonal change, and all the plants are watered by hose or by watering can, as it is the only way to ensure that all the plants get the correct amount of water.

Project team
Clients: Sheffield City Council
Architects: Pringle Richards Sharratt Architects
Project Management: Sheffield City Council
Quantity Surveyors: Sheffield City Council
Structural & Services Engineers: Buro Happold
Fire and Access Consultants: Buro Happold FEDRA
Lighting Consultants: Bartenbach LichtLabor/ Lichttechnik Martin Klingler
Winter Garden Landscape Consultant: Weddle Landscape Design
Planning Supervisor: Sheffield City Council
Management Contractor: Interserve Project Services Ltd
Plant supply, planting and aftercare: Rentokil Tropical Plants Ltd

Partners
The Winter Garden was funded by the Millennium Commission, Sheffield City Council and English Partnerships.

Awards won
RICS (Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors) Pro Yorkshire Award for Design & Innovation
RIBA (Royal Institute of British Architects) Award [with the Millennium Galleries].
European Federation of Interior Landscaping Groups – three gold awards
The Variety Club of Great Britain – Best Regeneration Award
Royal Fine Art Commission 'Jeu D’esprit Building of the Year' Award
British Guild of Travel Writers – Commendation
Civic Trust Green Flag Award
Also instrumental in Sheffield's win in the European entente florale award 2005

References
External links
Winter Garden pages on Sheffield City Council's website
Weddle Landscape Design – Landscape Architects and Horticulturalists for Sheffield Winter Garden